EDK v0.1.2 Alpha Release
========================

Release Date: 2025-05-04

Version: Alpha (v0.1.2)

Author: Earth Data Kit Team

----

🚀 What's New
-------------

We're excited to announce the **first Alpha release of Earth Data Kit (EDK)** — a unified toolkit making working with cloud-based GIS workflows easy.

The goal of this alpha release is to get a sense of whether something like EDK will be useful for GIS analysis, while working toward creating a seamless experience for geospatial data processing in the cloud. This initial release delivers foundational features focused on working with **4D raster datasets** (``time``, ``band``, ``x``, ``y``), built for ease of use and compatibility with the Python geospatial ecosystem.

Key Highlights
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Cloud-Native Mosaic Creation**  
  Stitch rasters from cloud storage like AWS S3 or Google Earth Engine into time-based mosaics.

- **Conversion to** ``xr.DataArray``  
  Native support for ``xarray`` and its ecosystem, including easy manipulation and analysis.

- **Built-In Export and Visualization**  
  Export to Cloud-Optimized GeoTIFFs and visualize with Folium maps directly from your DataArray.

----

🔧 Core Features
----------------

1. Cloud-Based Stitching API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Create timestamped mosaics from raster tiles stored in supported cloud storage systems.

- **discover()**  
  Scans and filters datasets based on spatial and temporal bounds. Returns a catalog of relevant tiles.

- **mosaic()**  
  Generates Virtual Raster Tiles (VRTs) for each timestamp using the discovered tiles.

- **save()**  
  Saves discovery metadata locally for reuse without re-running the scanning process.

.. note::
   | ✅ Uses GDAL internally so most raster formats should be supported. Testing other formats is on the roadmap.
   | ✅ Tested with GeoTIFFs on S3 and Earth Engine datasets

----

2. Integration with ``xr.DataArray``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

EDK transforms stitched mosaics into ``xarray.DataArray`` objects, unlocking advanced processing and visualization with Python libraries.

``export()``
^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Export 2D/3D/4D arrays to Cloud-Optimized GeoTIFFs (COGs)
- Export destinations

  - Local disk

  - S3 buckets via ``s5cmd`` (local copy + upload)

- Behavior:

  - 4D: one COG per ``time`` index (requires output folder)

  - 3D & 2D: requires explicit output file path

``plot()``
^^^^^^^^^^

- Renders a ``DataArray`` as an interactive map using Folium's ``ImageOverlay``
- Reads all data into memory and displays it over a map

.. warning::
   Limited by available system memory and Folium's rendering capacity

----

3. Metadata Preservation (Work in Progress)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Operations like ``.isel()`` or ``.sel()`` can drop key metadata (e.g., file paths), breaking downstream functions like ``export()`` and ``plot()``. This is the reason why libraries like rioxarray adds CRS in xarray coordinates, eg: spatial_ref

Planned Solution
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A wrapper class (inspired by `uxarray <https://github.com/uxarray>`_) that:

- Subclasses or wraps ``xr.DataArray``
- Retains critical metadata across operations
- Ensures export/visualization still works after filtering/slicing

----

🔮 Coming Soon
--------------

This alpha lays the foundation. Here's what's planned for upcoming releases:

- **🧩 Additional Data Sources**  
  - HTTP(S), STAC APIs, Azure Blob Storage

- **🗺️ Vector Mosaicking**  
  - Stitch vector data (with ability to export them to FlatGeobuf)

- **🌡️ Climate Data Format Support**  
  - NetCDF, HDF5, and GRIB for atmospheric/oceanographic datasets

- **🧼 Preprocessing Tools**  
  - Cloud masking and cloud treatment

----

❓ Open Design Questions
------------------------

We welcome community feedback on:

- What kind of interactive visualizations are important? (e.g., time slicing for an area of interest)
- How should we retain metadata, usually saved in xarray attributes, across xarray operations?
- Should metadata be **saved alongside exports** as sidecar files so that the entire time-series can be read without needing to open every file separately?

----

🧪 Try It Out
-------------

This Alpha release is ideal for researchers and developers working with cloud-native raster pipelines.

- 📦 **Installation:** *Coming soon via* ``pip``, see :doc:`/getting-started` for current installation instructions
- 🛠️ **GitHub:** <https://github.com/earth-data-kit/earth-data-kit>

----

Have questions or suggestions? Feel free to raise an issue or join the discussions on `GitHub <https://github.com/earth-data-kit/earth-data-kit/issues>`_.
